greetings one and all and welcome back
to another episode of the China history
podcast
lászló Montgomery here bringing you
another slice of Chinese history this
week this episode is special for my
champion short-track speedskating
listener mark in western australia today
we're looking at the may 4th movement
the Wu su-eun dome one of the most
important most pivotal most significant
events and periods in modern China
some historians contend modern China
begins with this explosive event on May
4th 1919 I'm sure a lot of you've been
wondering going back to the Treaty of
Nanjing in 1842 and through each and
every subsequent slap in the face China
got from Japan and the Western powers
when were they ever gonna stand up and
say enough already
well this is it this episode this is the
event in Chinese history where China
sort of wakes up and finally instead of
acquiescing automatically to whatever
the latest demands are China now really
starts to get some backbone and begins
to explore real ways to get out of this
situation there and this movement among
other things gave rise to the Communist
Party of China this is where the
founders of the party received their
greatest inspiration and nationalistic
pride and also got their earliest boost
coming up soon on July 1st will be the
90th anniversary of the founding of the
Communist Party in 1921 the may 4th
movement more than anything else that I
could think of provided all the
necessary inspiration needed for the
party to get started the icon of China
whose face graced hundreds of millions
of little red books Chairman Mao was
particularly inspired by this movement
and I think all educated people can
agree that it was on this day and as a
result of this whole May 4th movement
that the road to liberation or GF Fung
on 10 1 1949 really had its roots so
today we're going to look at this May
4th period the events that led up to
how the whole thing played out it's
really just a continuation of the same
old story again going back to the Treaty
of Nanjing it was after the opium war
that all the most powerful nations at
the time figured out they could pretty
much just force their will on China and
whatever concessions they wanted could
be had just by grabbing for it this
smash-and-grab era had finally gone on
long enough and after what happened to
China at the Paris Peace Conference in
1919 where the infamous Treaty of
Versailles was signed the whole
injustice of what China had endured
finally came to a head China in 1919 was
different from the China that had to
suffer the humiliation and consequences
of the Treaty of Shimonoseki China was
soundly defeated in the sino-japanese
war and reform-minded people especially
the younger crowd all concluded they had
to learn from these modern ways in order
to defend themselves from all the
foreign powers who had this headstart on
China so it was then after 1895 that
Chinese began fanning out to Tokyo to
the US Europe to study at all these
institutions of higher learning so now
in 1919 it's a quarter century later and
you have a whole generation that had
learned up-close about all these Western
ways and politics government business
and culture the arts armed with this
knowledge and background obtained
overseas the students who protested in
1919 were a lot more savvy than the
previous generation about the ways of
the world and why China had fallen
behind and what it was going to take to
be a player in the world community and
not everyone's favorite punching bag
this time when the may 4th movement
began in 1919 the Chinese were a lot
better prepared and were able to
articulate amongst themselves about the
steps China needed to take to get off
her knees so looking back on the whole
history of China in the early 20th
century it's really easy to conclude
that the may 4th movement was the
watershed of all
watersheds as far as where China got up
and started to brush itself off now
there was still the whole savagery of
the Japanese war of resistance world war
ii in the civil war that lay ahead by no
means to china enjoy a respite from all
the stress that they endured since the
1840s and 50s but it was definitely a
new china and a more modern china at
that so let's look at the may 4th
movement who were the characters what
were the events that led up to the big
demonstration in Beijing on May 4th 1919
the immediate spark that launched the
protests was the whole embarrassing
outcome for the Chinese delegation in
Paris when they took their rightful
place at the Allies victory table what
was China's involvement in World War one
the Chinese the French and British came
to an agreement in the summer of 1916
whereby a lot of laborers were recruited
mostly northern Chinese so many British
and French soldiers had been decimated
at the Somme that eep and other bloody
battles and France and elsewhere on the
continent by 1917 there was a major need
for additional troops to fight on the
front lines so the deal the British made
with the government of China called for
a Chinese labor corps who were able to
do all the heavy lifting and necessary
work at the docks construction projects
and behind the lines this freed up
English and French soldiers to go do
battle on the front lines these Chinese
workers mostly all poor and facing
incredible hardship and uncertainty in
China all volunteered for this dangerous
mission and served valiantly the first
boat sent from China to France was sunk
and 543 Chinese went down to the bottom
of the sea but by 1917 you had about
54,000 workers in France and 96 thousand
the next year although China's role in
World War one was not a combat role
their participation and the role they
played was important over 2,000 of these
Chinese workers died in the course of
their duty to the war
effort you know you could still see many
of the grapes still there in France
Flanders the Japanese like the Chinese
came down on the side of the Allies
China had declared war on Germany and
Austria on August 14th 1917 and then
these Chinese labor battalions started
getting shipped overseas Japanese
soldiers didn't play any combat role in
World War one and most of the action
Japan saw involved grabbing territory
and moving in on the German concessions
in and around Qingdao
so after Germany was defeated and all
the great powers that had been involved
in this World War all convened in Paris
it came time to divvy up the spoils this
is where China gets the major shaft
there was a 62 member delegation sent to
Paris to represent China by this time
the warlord era which we haven't
discussed yet is in full swing and it
wasn't clear to anyone if this Chinese
delegation represented a country or a
government or maybe just a city Beijing
although appearances were kept up to
show a legitimate Chinese government as
we'll see on another day China is in the
midst of one of its interregnum periods
of disunity the delegation was led by
loot song-chun and Wong Jung team will
fast forward past all the dramatics that
went on behind the scenes and between
those and China and those who were
representing them in Paris the word on
the street was that China was gonna be
disappointed about the outcome of the
Shandong problem the vanquished Germans
lost everything in China the big
question going back to 1916 when China
first started serious discussions about
entering the war was would there be some
kind of quid pro quo whereby if China
threw in there lots with the Allies Mike
they at the very least be given back all
the vacated German possessions in
Shandong I mean that was the primary
factor in getting involved it really
came down to that and there were very
high hopes in the Chinese delegation
that gathered in Paris in April May and
June of 1919
but those hopes were dashed no
recognition for China just another kick
in the teeth but this time the Chinese
got very angry articles 128 to 134 of
the treaty saw Germany renouncing in
favor of China all benefits and
privileges resulting from provisions of
the final boxer protocol signed at
Peking September 7th 1901 so far so good
but then came clauses 156 to 158 which
stated quote Germany renounces in favor
of Japan all her rights and privileges
particularly those concerning the
territory of Jo Jo which was basically
everything around Qingdao
this included the railways the mines
submarine cables all of it everything
all went to Japan this was the big
bombshell this is what ignited the may
4th demonstrations now let's step back a
minute and look at how China could have
gotten screwed the way they did first of
all their cause was just Shandong was
Chinese territory and always had been
and for crying out loud this is where
Confucius came from so it was only right
that given how Shandong had been a
German sphere of influence and Germany
was now a defeated power it was
reasonable to expect this wrong would be
righted also there was the fact of
China's involvement in the Great War
they were on the winning side so
theoretically they should get a Super
Bowl ring just like everyone else and on
top of that Woodrow Wilson the US
president at the time was a well-known
proponent of self-determination and
giving everyone a fair shake so what
went wrong well it was simple China had
been sold out by their own leaders there
were a multitude of traders who later
generations of Chinese blame for selling
out to foreign interests especially to
the Japanese but chief among these words
Howell ruled in Luzon you and Jang
Songshan the other character who sold
China down the river was the most
powerful force in China around 1916 the
was the premiere and also a bonafide
warlord who controlled one of the major
forces contending for power
remember China is divided at this time
into the KMT or Guam in down forces
mostly in the south and then the north
is controlled by various warlords
including this premier Duan Chi ray
Bloodshy ray was the head of what was
called the an quake leak he was another
Lee Hong Chun Protege like you and sure
Kai he was his greedy and self-serving
as the next warlord and in order to fund
his military campaign against the other
competing military powers in China he
arranged a series of bank loans known as
the nishihara loans was named after the
guy who arranged them in China on behalf
of the Japanese these loans were
negotiated by Duan in exchange for what
else but territorial concessions the
loans were backed by the Japan
government were sort of a quid pro quo
duan got his military campaigns
bankrolled by Japan and in return
Japan was able to confirm all their
various claims to Shandong and
additional rights in Manchuria and
besides this there had been secret deals
made in early 1917 between the Japanese
and the French British and Italians that
called for Japanese naval support
against the Germans if necessary for
this commitment of support Japan was
given the right to take over from the
Germans after they were defeated when
the Chinese representatives were at the
Paris Peace Conference they were unaware
of this they also didn't know about the
nishihara loans so you can imagine the
outrage once all these revelations
surfaced once it became known that
China's own government had sold the
country down the river Wilson Clemenceau
and Lloyd George the leaders of the u.s.
France and Britain all said
international law should prevail and
although it wasn't fair China had
willingly entered into these deals so
this final decision was made on April
30th 1919 and in protest the Chinese
representatives refused to sign the
treaty and that's how it end
but word even for 1919 standards
traveled fast the outrage was explosive
if you recall from the last podcast on
the aftermath of the Shanghai revolution
you had Japan's twenty-one demands
January 1915 in the ensuing two treaties
and may that year and now you hit the
whole humiliation of not only China's
contribution to the war effort being
disrespected but China's whole
sovereignty and territorial integrity as
well the opium war treaties the Boxer
protocols the Treaty of Shimonoseki 21
demands and now this this is the part
where the intellectuals rise up and come
into their own okay so now we have a
little background on how the may 4th
demonstration got set up we have a long
string of humiliations and finally with
the outcome of the Great War and the
Treaty of Versailles going so
dramatically against China this is the
final insult so let's look at the people
who led the charge and who rose to
prominence during this time as I
mentioned earlier about 25 years had
passed since Chinese started leaving in
droves to go study overseas now after
having done some time overseas a lot of
these students and teachers are back in
China and filled with all kinds of new
ideas and wisdom a very hearty debate is
going on amongst the educated class
about the road China should take about
the role of Confucius and China's new
modern society and also the matter of
which form of government best suit in
China you know with the downright
betrayal that the Chinese felt at the
conclusion of World War one and the
resulting treaty it really turned a lot
of influential people off as far as
Western liberal ideas went those who had
looked to the west and Western ways of
government were so stung by the outcome
of the Treaty of Versailles that right
then and there they decided the Western
model was not an honorable one the whole
betrayal sort of rolled out the red
carpet for Marxism to walk right into
China and
allow everyone to get acquainted with
the whole idea and see if the shoe fits
remember in 1917 you had the Bolsheviks
and the October Revolution these
earth-shattering events going on in
Russia reverberated in China right at
the moment of the West's perfidy the way
China was betrayed by the West made a
lot of Chinese take a long hard look at
this whole new Marxist ideology and to
what was going on in Russia
okay so let's name some names here and
discuss who were the forces that led the
movement chief among everyone was Chandu
Shaw he was a major force in Chinese
intellectual thought and one of the
cofounders of the Communist Party in
China in fact he was the party's first
general secretary Chen do show well he
was a firebrand and completely rejected
the old ways and anything Confucius had
to say he would say don't listen to
those conservatives and Confucian
scholars have nothing to teach China in
this modern age and furthermore we'll
just keep telling you the old ways are
still the best way to deal with whatever
came up two guys are credited with the
founding of the Communist Party of China
one is this guy Chen do show the other
was Lee thought Chao
they were the Lennon and McCartney the
Rodgers and Hammerstein of the Communist
Party and the embryonic days of 1915
1916 all the way up to 1919 Lee was the
head librarian over at Peking University
guess who the assistant librarian was
mounted on aka Chairman Mao now you also
had another co-founder of the Communist
Party
along with Chen do show and Leto Chao
there was also the great writer whose
shirt when the Communist Party was still
an embryo just beginning to divide you
had these three guys in the enzyme or
magical additive the thing at the time
or whatever you want to call it that
created this whole intellectual
atmosphere was the magazine known as
ching ching yen new youth magazine la
jeunesse the first issue came out in
September
19:15 this was Chandu shows baby and one
of the things that made him great it
made him great because what came about
as a result of this magazine was the
whole new culture movement in China this
magazine was the outlet for all the
writers and writings that define these
historic times every and all future
leader that would go on to found the
Communist Party and help build the
nation after 1949 were all influenced by
the writings and the ideas that came out
of new youth magazine Mao wrote his
first article for new youth in 1917 in
the 14th century in Italy well it wasn't
called Italy yet but in that time period
when Dante Boccaccio were writing in
this new Italian vernacular it ended up
laying the groundwork and setting up the
Renaissance it changed everything now
China's time had come to at last have
their own sort of rebirth right when all
this new Chinese vernacular writing
begins to really gain momentum you have
the one-two punch of the October
Revolution in Russia in 1917 and the
whole ordeal and disappointment in Paris
with the Treaty these were two topics
tailor-made for the writers at the time
who knew better than anyone else how to
inspire their countrymen and with it
with the turn of a phrase or with
sarcasm historical allusions let me give
you a brief lesson about the written
Chinese language I mean I'm not a
teacher or anything that I can tell you
this much now I'm pretty much
self-taught in the written language and
I'd hardly call myself trained enough to
read dream of the red chamber in Chinese
without the constant need to refer to my
dictionary but if I'm on an airplane
flying from Ningbo to Hongkong and
there's a Chinese newspaper magazine on
the seat I could read it with ok
comprehension however if you showed me a
book written in the Qing Dynasty using
the one yen when or classical Chinese
writing system I'd be able to read most
of the characters but I would have
almost no comprehension whatsoever
of what was printed on the page you see
Chinese characters they usually have
more than one meaning when you look some
characters up in the Chinese dictionary
they'll have eight ten or twelve
different meanings and archaic usages if
you were trained in the classics and
knew how to read it a sentence written
and characters using the classical
Chinese style means something different
from how you say the same meaning in the
vernacular let's just say that when Yin
when the classical style is as dead as
you can get and I have not met too many
Chinese of my generation that could read
it well I would compare it to something
like Latin or ancient Greek to be able
to understand classical Chinese requires
a lot of learning you've heard in more
than a few past episodes how difficult
it was to pass these civil service exams
classical Chinese is extremely intricate
and subtle and when you read something
written in classical Chinese well no one
actually talks like that
vernacular Italian opened up new worlds
to the masses of people in the 14th
century the new culture movements
signature trade was promoting vernacular
Chinese it opened up new vistas in China
this by ha or plain speech was in a way
a second revolution as much as printing
was and capturing ideas on paper and
disseminating ideas and information and
one of the Great's at the time of the
new culture movement whose work was
prominent and who sprang out of the
pages of new youth magazine was the
great whole shirt who sure was one of
those young people who had left China in
the early 1900s to study overseas who
studied at both Cornell and Columbia for
seven years he came back to China and
was recruited by Chengdu show to join
the faculty at Peking University Chen
was the Dean of the University then no
one did more for launching the use of
the vernacular Chinese in modern Chinese
literature than Hoelscher and one other
guy I'll mention in a second who sure
said quote a dead language meaning
classical Chinese cannot produce a
living literature he wrote many articles
for new youth magazine was supported a
great deal by Chandu Show who sure was
not as much of a hothead as Chandu show
who sure still maintained some
attachment to some traditional learning
but still said everything from the old
days had to be re-examined to make sure
it had relevance and use in the new
society now along with who'll sure in
terms of the Giants of early Chinese
vernacular literature was Lucien it
seemed no one could explain things like
these two could no one could ridicule
the ridiculous and irrational in China
like who sure and Lucien they so
perfectly articulated how pretty much
everyone felt and it was as if China and
the Chinese finally had a voice that in
some way or another spoke to everyone
and for them the writings that came out
of new youth magazine really spoke to
the heart of the Chinese and made people
think about China and where the country
was going it was Lucien who with his two
short story collections a call to arms
and wandering defined Chinese modern
literature at the time he wrote his
first article for new youth in May of
1918 was an early masterpiece diary of a
madman quandra and Yugi the whole
vernacular movement really took off with
Lucien I suppose we can trace things
back to Leung Chiu Chow and yeah fool
whose works at the turn of the century
inspired the next generation who were
the ones now writing articles in new
youth magazine and publishing all kinds
of short stories and political pieces
that were really stirring things up
amongst the masses as well as the
literati these great writers whose works
inspired the leaders of what later
became the People's Republic they didn't
just appear out of nowhere they were
inspired by people such as Leung Chiu
Chow and yen foo and others who sought
an explanation for China after the
events of the 1890
to the turn of the century Lucien and
some of the other writers of this time
will be covered later on when we take a
more in-depth look at their impact on
Chinese history and events Lucien is a
is a giant among Giants okay so now
we've discussed the Treaty of Versailles
and how China lost face and didn't get
any of the winnings nothing was left on
the table for China when all was said
and done and we've also touched upon
some of the main characters in the new
culture movement Chen do show Lee Dajjal
and who sure
Lucien so word gets back to everyone in
China at the end of April that it was
the worst case scenario in Paris and now
all the outrage is organized and
channeled into a protest that had been
pushed up to the date of May 4th 1919
all the various student organizations in
Beijing such as the new tide Society
work-study Society cooperative society
all these student organizations all
assembled on the morning of May 4th in
front of Tiananmen the gate of heavenly
peace now 10 men then was not even close
to what you see it today now the
demonstration was originally set for May
7th which was the four-year anniversary
of what was called national humiliation
day when Japan presented the amended
demands originally presented to you
insurer Kai but the powers that be at
the time they found out about this
planned demonstration and they organized
a crackdown to prevent the demonstration
from taking place so everything got
pushed up to Sunday morning 10:00 a.m.
on May 4th
there was nationwide support from not
only students from other universities
but from Chinese business groups and
professional associations as well
especially in the aftermath of the
demonstration everyone was on board with
this that is everyone except the
Warlord's who saw all this as
counterproductive to their agenda and of
course there were also conservatives who
didn't think this whole idea about
tearing down the past was a good thing
so everyone gathers at the gate of
heavenly peace Tienanmen
and the demonstrators from about 13
different universities in Beijing are
about 3,000 strong they marched on the
foreign legation quarter and wanted to
meet the US ambassador but back in those
days it was protected by a wall and by
guards this was ever since the boxers
besieged the same area over a decade
before once it was learned that no one
was going to speak with the students
this sort of heated things up a notch
and then they marched on tal Rulon's
House Hall was one of the traders who
had been blamed for selling out to Japan
in fact he was more or less the chief
Pro Japan figure in the bay young
government that controlled Beijing at
the time it's how ruling more than most
sort of became the poster child for
appeasement and giving in to the
Japanese and looking to them as the
model for China tall incidentally was
the one tasked by un shirk eye in 1915
to actually sign the twenty-one demands
in the heat of the moment the student
demonstrators burned his house down but
Hall had escaped and had sought refuge
elsewhere Jiang dong Cheng was not so
lucky he was another of the so-called
traitors vilified by the Chinese
students and by history books were being
in the pockets of the Japanese
imperialists they caught him and they
beat him up pretty badly and taught him
a lesson
well as things progressed the police had
organized and were using some very
heavy-handed tactics to quell the
demonstration the gist of the
demonstration could be summed up in one
of the banners that read quote China's
territory may be conquered but it cannot
be given away the Chinese people may be
massacred but they will not surrender
our country is about to be annihilated
rise up brethren it said that people who
line the streets to watch the protesters
wept with patriotic pride as they read
all the anti-japanese banners that pass
them by this was news all over China
everyone came together on this one
students teachers rural merchants
had made it big entrepreneurs who lived
in the cities labor unions and in the
man on the street finally the Chung
wallah by Shing could say there was
action this time and not just talk in
all about eleven hundred and fifty of
the protesters got locked up the
military interests in Beijing at the
time didn't like the tone of the
protests however widespread public
pressure from all over China forced the
release of those arrested and this was a
bittersweet victory for the movement and
had showed that China had turned a
corner a rising tide of nationalism was
gathering momentum like never before and
the may 4th movement that followed the
actual day of the demonstration had
great voices who were able to articulate
the mood of the nation and offer
suggestions and ideas regarding which
roads to follow and which to avoid you
know up till now the new culture
movement and much of the writings coming
out of these writers was not that
political it wasn't until after the May
fourth demonstrations that the learned
and literate classes directed their ire
and their pens at the politics of the
day and you could see in their writings
how they blended the cultural and the
political and a language all literate
and semi-literate people could easily
read this was the broadest demonstration
of national feeling ever
there was also an iconoclastic element
to the may 4th movement the whole
experience encapsulated all the
frustrations the despair and hopes of
all Chinese caught up in the movement
either as a spectator or a participator
there were plenty of Chinese out there
who could trace every single failure and
fault
of China or Chinese culture directly or
indirectly to Confucianism among some
but not all there was total rejection
and outright vilification of the old
ways the prevailing attitude among many
was that it was the old irrelevant ways
that got China into this mess in the
first place and of course the may 4th
movement was also an anti-imperialist
movement and spoke out viciously and
direct
against the Japanese and those powers
who had taken advantage of China in
their time of helplessness
people were really venting now and of
course you had the greatest writers at
the time who acted as the perfect
mouthpiece for the people's passions
many turned to Marxism but here was the
problem at this stage just before the
founding of the CCP in July 19-21 China
had yet to go through a bourgeois stage
of development there was no industrial
labor class yet who were ripe for
revolution China didn't fit the Russian
mold so on the one hand some Chinese
began to embrace Bolshevism but on the
other hand according to Marxist ideology
China wasn't ready yet and still needed
to go through the whole five-step
process or whatever it was and on the
other hand just like all these
international brands who I the China
market and its limitless potential so
did the Bolsheviks and if they had to
bend a little to take China's unique
situation and stage of development into
account then they just had to do it and
so it began that the Comintern started
sending their people to work with the
Chinese and get things organized but all
these fascinating details we are going
to hold for another day when we look at
the founding of the CCP some of the
writers whose work made it to new youth
magazine taught mao and others who
thought like mile that complete cultural
and moral transformation was necessary
to have real tangible social and
political reform in china
you had to tear down the old to build
the new you had to have like a Cultural
Revolution so now you could see where
Mao got that great idea in the aftermath
that followed there were a multitude of
student strikes mass arrests organized
boycotts and - one demonstration after
another
there was an utter explosion onto the
scene of pamphlets and periodicals all
kinds and now with the vernacular
becoming so commonplace it was perfect
timing and Western thinkers and artists
started coming to China
gret singer brought ideas of family
planning to china john dewey albert
einstein henrik ibsen and many others
from europe from india and elsewhere in
Asia now the ideas were flowing and into
the twenty 1920s and 30s even after
Japan invades China the new ideas that
grew out of the new culture and may
forth movements flourished all over
China despair turn to hope now we're
gonna look at this topic another day but
the emancipation of women and the whole
women's movement really started to take
off at this time too it was during the
aftermath of the May fourth
demonstrations that Chinese women stood
up for the first time in it effective
and in a coordinated way that made
people take notice but as we'll soon see
following the May fourth demonstrations
China has another three very difficult
and bloody decades of war and atrocities
before Mao gets to stand up on the
podium at Tiananmen and declare the
Chinese people have stood up and you
want another funny thing in December
1922 just a few years after the May
fourth demonstration in 1919 Japan
signed the Washington Naval Treaty or v
power treaty as was also called it was a
naval limitations treaty with the
Western powers in Japan its intention
was to prevent any kind of arms race
like there was just prior to him leading
up to World War one anyways after all
this Japan handed Qingdao back to the
Republic of China so after all this
fighting and causing 10,000 years of
ill-will 3 years after the fact Japan
leave Shandong but as we'll see later on
they come back with a vengeance but
that's for another day and we're going
to leave it right here for now and sign
off until next time sorry about the
delay everyone I just had too good of a
time in Vegas this past weekend Paul
McCartney was fantastic opened up with
magical mystery tour and the last encore
of the night was the
sergeant pepper's reprise and the end
from Abbey Road not bad for a guy who's
turning 69 this weekend my daughter is
the same birthday as Sir Paul anyway
thanks for listening everyone that is if
you made it this far
this is Lazlo Montgomery signing off
once again from the farthest edge of Los
Angeles County in the foothills of the
San Bernardino Mountains from the very
civilized in patriotic town of Claremont
California join us next week won't you
for another exciting episode of a China
history podcast